>> Ifill: THE SURVIVING SUSPECT
IN THE BOSTON BOMBINGS WAS
CHARGED TODAY WITH THE USE OF A
APOWEN OF MASS DESTRUCTION.
GOOD EVENING, I'M GWEN IFILL.
>> Brown: AND I'M JEFFREY BROWN.
ON THE "NEWSHOU TONR"IGHT, WE
UPDATE THE INVESTIGATION, BOTH
IN THE U.S. AND ABROAD, INTO THE
TWO BROTHERS BELIEVED TO BE
BEHIND THE BLASTS, AS THE
YOUNGEST REMAINS HOSPITALIZED IN
SERIOUS, BUT STABLE CONDITION.
>> Ifill: AND WE EXPLORE THE
LEGAL QUESTIONS RAISED BY TRYING
DZHOKHAR TSARNAEV IN FEDERAL
COURT.
>> Brown: THEN, RAY SUAREZ GETS
AN UPDATE ON GUANTANAMO BAY,
WHERMOREE  THAN HALF THE
PRISONERS ARE NOW ON A HUNGER
STRIKE, PROTESTING THEIR
INDEFINITE DETENTIONS.
>> Ifill: PAUL SOLMAN HAS THE
STORY OF OLDER WORKERS STARTING
NEW BUSINESSES LATE IN LIFE.
>> IF YOU'RE SMART AND YOU
REALIZE YOU'RE GETTING OLDER,
WELL THEN, GET INTO A BUSINESS
WHERE YOU LEVERAGE THE YOUNGER
PEOPLE AND EVENTUALLY U BEYOCOME
THE GREAT GRAY GOD.
>> Brown: AND JUDY WOODRUFF
LOOKS INTO THE TRIAL OF KERMIT
GOSNELL-- THE PHILADELPHIA
ABORTION DOCTOR ACCUSED OF EIGHT
COUNTS OF MURDER.
>> Ifill: THAT'S ALL AHEAD ON
TONIGHT'S "NEWSHOUR."
>> Brown: THE CHECHEN-AMERICAN
TEENAGER ACCUSED IN THE BOSTON
MARATHON BOMBINGS NOW FACES A
POSSIBLE DEATH SENTENCE.
THE FILING OF CHARGES TODAY
OFFICIALLY MOVED THE CASE INTO
THE FEDERAL COURTS, EVEN AS THE
CITY BEGAN RETURNING TO NORMAL.
DZHOKHAR TSARNAEV WAS ARRAIGNED
THIS MORNING, AT BOSTON'S BETH
ISRAEL DEACONESS HOSPITAL, WHERE
HE REMAINED IN SERIOUS
CONDITION.
A SHORT TIME LATER CAME WORD OF
THE COMPLAINT, FILED BY THE U.S.
JUSTICE DEPARTMENT.
IT FORMALLY CHARGED THE 19-YEAR-
OLD WITH CONSPIRING TO USE A
WEAPON OF MASS DESTRUCTION,
POTENTIALLY, A CAPITAL CRIME,
PUNISHABLE BY THE DEATH PENALTY.
AND, DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY BY
EXPLOSIVE DEVICE, CAUSING DEATH.
TSARNAEV HAD BEEN ABLE,
SPORADICALLY, TO ANSWER
QUESTIONS IN WRITING, BUT A
GUNSHOT WOUND TO THE NECK LEFT
HIM UNABLE TO SPEAK.
IT WAS UNCLEAR IF HE WAS READ
HIS MIRANDA RIGHTS.
BUT IN WASHINGTON, WHITE HOUSE
SPOKESMAN JAY CARNEY SAID HE'S A
NATURALIZED U.S. CITIZEN, SO HE
WILL NOT FACE A MILITARY
TRIBUNAL.
>> HE WILL NOT BE TREATED AS AN
ENEMY COMBATANT.
WE WILL PROSECUTE THIS TERRORIST
THROUGH OUR CIVILIAN SYSTEM OF
JUSTICE, UNDER US LAW.
U.S. CITIZEN CAN NOT BE TRIALED,
TRIED RATHER IN MILITARY
COMMISSIONS.
AND IT'S IMPORTANT TO REMEMBER
THAT SINCE 9-11 WE HAVE USED THE
FEDERAL COURT SYSTEM TO CONVICT
AND INCARCERATE HUNDREDS OF
TERRORISTS.
>> Brown: TSARNAEV WAS ALSO
LIKELY TO FACE STATE CHARGES IN
THE SHOOTING DEATH OF A POLICE
OFFICER AT M.I.T.
IT ALL FOLLOWED HIS DRAMATIC
CAPTURE FRIDAY EVENING, WHEN HE
WAS FOUND HIDING AND WOUNDED IN
A BOAT BEHIND A HOME IN THE
BOSTON SUBURB OF WATERTOWN.
HIS OLDER BROTHER TAMARLEN DIED
HOURS EARLIER IN A SHOOT-OUT
WITH POLICE THAT TRIGGERED THE
ALL-DAY MANHUNT AND SHUT DOWN
THE CITY.
YESTERDAY, ON CBS, MASSACHUSETTS
GOVERNOR DEVAL PATRICK STOOD BY
THE UNPRECEDENTED MEASURES.
>> I THINK PEOPLE UNDERSTOOD
THAT WE WERE MAKING DECISIONS IN
THE FACE OF A RAPIDLY DEVELOPING
INVESTIGATION AND THAT WE WERE
MAKING THEM IN THE BEST
INTERESTS OF PEOPLE'S PUBLIC
SAFETY, OR THE PUBLIC'S SAFETY.
I THINK THERE WON'T BE POLITICAL
BACKLASH AND FRANKLY I'M NOT
THINKING ABOUT THAT ANYHOW.
>> Brown: IN BOSTON TODAY, IT
WAS A TIME OF REMEMBRANCE AND
REFLECTION.
BELLS TOLLED AS PEOPLE OBSERVED
A MOMENT OF SILENCE AT 2:50 P.M.
THE TIME ONE WEEK AGO THAT TWIN
BOMBS EXPLODED AT THE FINISH
LINE OF THE BOSTON MARATHON.
ELSEWHERE, FRIENDS AND FAMILY
GATHERED AT ST. JOSEPH'S
CATHOLIC CHURCH FOR THE FUNERAL
SERVICE OF 29-YEAR-OLD KRYSTLE
CAMPBELL-- ONE OF THREE PEOPLE
KILLED IN THE  BOMBINGS.
A MEMORIAL SERVICE FOR ANOTHER
VICTIM CHINESE GRADUATE STUDENT
LU LINGZI WAS SET FOR THIS
EVENING.
BACK IN WASHINGTON, PRESIDENT
OBAMA ALSO OBSERVED A MOMENT OF
SILENCE AT THE WHITE HOUSE AS
DID THE U.S. SENATE.
BUT TEMPERS FLARED EARLIER AT A
SENATE HEARING.
IOWA SENATOR CHUCK GRASSLEY WAS
ONE OF SEVERAL REPUBLICANS
WHO'VE SAID THE BOMBINGS,
ALLEGEDLY BY TWO CHECHEN
IMMIGRANTS, RAISE QUESTIONS
ABOUT IMMIGRATION REFORM.
>> I THINK WE'RE TAKING
ADVANTAGE OF AN OPPORTUNITY
WHERE ONCE IN 25 YEARS WE DEAL
WITH IMMIGRATION TO MAKE SURE
THAT EVERY BASE IS COVERED.
>> Brown: THAT SPARKED A HEATED
EXCHANGE BETWEEN GRASSLEY AND
NEW YORK DEMOCRAT CHUCK SCHUMER.
>> I SAY THAT PARTICULARLY THOSE
WHO ARE POINTING TO WHAT
HAPPENED, THE TERRIBLE TRAGEDY
IN BOSTON, AS I WOULD SAY AN
EXCUSE FOR NOT DOING A BILL OR
DELAYING IT MANY MONTHS AND
YEARS.
>> I NEVER SAID THAT.
>> I DIDN'T SAY YOU DID SIR.
>> I DIDN'T SAY ANYTHING
ABOUT...
>> I DIDN'T MEAN YOU, MR.
GRASSLEY.
>> THOSE REMARKS WERE NOT AIMED
AT ANYONE ON THIS COMMITTEE OR
THE THREE WITNESSES.
THERE ARE PEOPLE OUT THERE;
YOU'VE READ IT IN THE
NEWSPAPERS; THEY'VE SAID IT.
>> Brown: THERE WERE ALSO
QUESTIONS ABOUT THE F.B.I.'S
INVESTIGATION LAST YEAR OF
TAMERLAN TSARNAEV, AFTER HE
SPENT SIX MONTHS IN RUSSIA.
SENATOR DIANE FEINSTEIN,
CHAIRING THE INTELLIGENCE
COMMITTEE, SAID SENIOR F.B.I.
MAY TESTIFY TOMORROW ABOUT WHY
THEY DID NOT PURSUE THE MATTER
FURTHER.
I MISSPOKE IN THAT SET-UP PIECE.
TSARNAEV WAS READ HIS MIRANDA
RIGHTS IN HIS HOSPITAL ROOM
TODAY.
WE'RE JOINED BY A REPORTER WHO
HAS BEEN FOLLOWING DEVELOPMENTS
CLOSELY.
DINA TEMPLE RASTON IS NPR AS
ANTI-TERRORISM CORRESPONDENT.
WELCOME TO YOU.
DO WE KNOW HOW MUCH OR WHAT
INVESTIGATORS ARE LEARNING FROM
TSARNAEV IN THE HOSPITAL SO FAR?
>> WELL, THERE'S BEEN VERY
LITTLE THAT THEY'VE LEARND
BECAUSE HE CAN'T REALLY
UNDERSTAND THAT HE CAN'T SPEAK.
HE HAS A TUBE IN HIS THROAT.
HE HAS SOME SORT OF A WOUND ON
HIS NECK AND HIS HAND.
APPARENTLY TO HIS JAW.
THERE'S SOME QUESTION AS TO
WHETHER OR NOT IT WAS A
SELF-INFLICTED WOUND.
SO AS A RESULT APPARENTLY
THEY'RE WRITING NOTES BACK AND
FORTH.
IT'S UNCLEAR IF THOSE NOTES ARE
RA PORT BUILDING SO HE LEARNS TO
TRUST THESE PEOPLE WHO ARE
TRYING TO QUESTION HIM OR WHERE
THEY'RE GETTING SUBSTANTIVE
INFORMATION FROM HIM.
>> Brown: WHAT CAN YOU TELL US
ABOUT THE FOCUS OF THE
INVESTIGATION RIGHT NOW?
WHAT DO INVESTIGATORS SEE AS THE
MOST IMPORTANT LEAD?
>> WELL, ONE OF THE THINGS IS
THEY CAN'T REALLY QUESTION THE
YOUNGER SUSPECT, SUSPECT NUMBER
2, THE ONE WITH THE WHITE
BASKETBALL CAP ON, UNTIL HE IS
REALLY LUCID.
BECAUSE OF THAT, THEY HAVE
CONCENTRATED THEIR EFFORTS ON
WHAT HIS OLDER BROTHER WAS UP TO
OVER THE PAST SORT OF COUPLE OF
YEARS.
YOU MENTIONED IN YOUR PIECE THAT
THERE WAS A 2011 INTERVIEW THAT
THE F.B.I. HAD WITH THE OLDER
BROTHER AT THE REQUEST OF THE
RUSSIAN GOVEMENRNT.
THEY BASICALLY SAID THEY THOUGHT
HE HAD LINKS TO RADICAL
ISLAMISTS IN RUSSIA AND WANTED
THE F.B.I. TO SORT OF
INVESTIGATE THAT.
THE F.B.I. COULDN'T FIND
ANYTHING THAT HE HAD DONE
ILLEGAL.
SO THEY ALLOWED HIM TO LEAVE.
AND THEN WE SUBSEQUENTLY LEARNED
THAT HE WENT TO RUSSIA LAST
YEAR.
HE WAS THERE FOR SIX MONTHS.
WHAT THEY'RE LOOKING FOROW N IS
WHAT WAS HE DOING WHILE HE WAS
IN RUSSIA?
WAS HE TRAINING, FOR EXAMPLE?
WAS HE MEETING WITH RADICAL
ISLAMISTS WHO MIGHT HAVE HELP
RED CALIZE HIM.
THOSE ARE THE THREADS THEY'RE
PULLING TO TRY TO PUT SOMETHING
A MOTIVE ABOUT WHAT HAPPENED
LEADING UP TO THESE BOMBINGS.
>> Brown: IN RESPONSE TO THE
QUESTIONS THAT HAVE COME ABOUT
WHETHER THE F.B.I. DID ENOUGH TO
CHECK HIM OUT AT THE REQUEST OF
THE RUSSIANS, WHAT'S THE
RESPONSE SO FAR?
>> WELL, YOU KNOW, IF HE WASN'T
DOING SOMETHING ILLEGAL, THERE'S
ONLY SO MUCH THAT THE F.B.I. CAN
DO IN TERMS OF AN INVESTIGATION.
THEY WENT TO HIS HOUSE.
THEY ASKD QUESTIONS.
APPARENTLY THEY HAD TEA WITH HIS
FAMILY BUT IF HE WASN'T DOING
ANYTHING ILLEGAL THEY'RE NOT
ALLOWED TO FOLLOW HIM.
THIS HAS BEEN THE BACK-AND-FORTH
GOING ON NOW.
THERE'S BEEN FINGER POINTING
BECAUSE THIS HAPPENED.
THEY'RE ASKING WHY THE F.B.I.
DIDN'T FOLLOW UP.
IF HE'S NOT DOING SOMETHING
ILLEGAL THEY'RE NOT ALLOWED TO
FOLLOW HIM.
>> Brown: THEY'RE LOOKING OVER
THERE AND LOOKING IN BOSTON INTO
THE LIVES OF THESE TWO.
ONE OF THE QUESTIONS IS ABOUT
THE TURN TO RELIGION, IF YOU
WILL, BY TAMERLAN AND THE
POSSIBLE TURN TO RADICALIZATION
BY BOTH OF THEM.
HOW MUCH IS KNOWN?
>> WELL, WHAT WE UNDERSTAND --
AND THERE WAS A GREAT ARTICLE IN
THE WALL STREET JOURNAL THIS
MORNING THAT REALLY PIECED A LOT
OF THIS TOGETHER BY A HUGE TEAM
AT THE WALL STREET JOURNAL --
BASICALLY WHAT WE UNDERSTAND IS
THAT HIS MOTHER BECAME MORE
DEVOUT.
AND THEN THE OLDER BROTHER,
TAMERLAN, SORT OF FOLLOWED IN
HER MODEL AND BECAME MORE DEVOUT
AS WELL.
AND BECAME QUITE RADICAL IN HIS
BELIEFS.
WE KNOW THAT HE WAS VISITING
JIHADY WEBSITES.
WE KNOW THAT HE ACTUALLY POSTED
PRO AL QAEDA OR AT LEAST PRO
RADICAL ISLAM.
WHAT IT SEEMS TO BE -- AND AGAIN
THIS IS VERY EARLY DAYS IN THE
INVESTIGATION AND SO, YOU KNOW,
THEY KEEP SAYING THAT IN THE
EARLY DAYS OF THE INVESTIGATION,
YOU'RE ALMOST ALWAYS WRONG WHEN
YOUUMP J TO CONCLUSIONS.
BUT IN THESE EARLY DAYS OF THE
INVESTIGATION IT APPEARS THAT
THE OLDER BROTHER HAD A
TREMENDOUS AMOUNT OR HELD GREAT
SWAY OVER THE YOUNGER BROTHER.
AND THAT THE YOUNGER BROTHER
DIDN'T SEEM TO HAVE ANY OUTWARD
SIGNS OF THIS SORT OF RADICAL
ISLAMIC BELIEF BUT FOLLOWED IN
THE FOOTSTEPS OF HIS OLDER
BROTHER.
SO THAT'S WHAT INVESTIGATORS ARE
GOING TO TRY TO FIND OUT WHEN
THEY FINALLY GET TO TALK TO HIM
IN THE HOSPITAL.
AS YOU MENTIONED IN YOUR PIECE,
THEY DID END UP MIRANDAIZING
HIM, READING HIM HIS RIGHTS.
THERE WAS SOME QUESTION AS TO
WHETHER OR NOT THEY WOULD USE
SOMETHING CALLED THE PUBLIC
SAFETY EXCEPTION WHICH BASICALLY
SAYS YOU DON'T HAVE TO READ
SOMEONE THEIR MIRANDA RIGHTS IF
YOU BELIEVE THAT THE PUBLIC
SAFETY IS IN DANGER.
IN OTHER WORDS, YOU KNOW, IF YOU
THOUGHT THAT... IF YOU READ HIM
HIS RIGHTS HE MIGHT REMAIN
SILENT ABOUT CO-CONSPIRACIES OR
BOMBS THAT MIGHT BE ELSEWHERE IN
BOSTON OR IN THE SURROUNDING
AREA.
AND I GUESS THEY MADE THE
DETERMINATION THAT THAT WAS NOT
NECESSARY SO THEY READ HIM HIS
RIGHTS RIGHT AWAY.
>> Brown: A COUPLE OTHER AREAS
OF THE INVESTIGATION THAT
CONTINUES.
ONE, THEY'RE STILL LOOKING AT
THE BOMBS, RIGHT?
BOMB FRAGMENTS THAT THEY PICK UP
FROM THE SITE.
ANOTHER ONE IS THAT APPARENTLY
FEDERAL INVESTIGATORS ARE TRYING
TO INTERVIEW THE OLDER TAMERLAN
TSARNAEV'S WIFE AT THIS POINT.
I GATHER GET IN TOUCH WITH HER
ATTORNEY.
>> YES.
AND IN ADDITION TO THAT, I MEAN,
THEY HAD MORE THAN JUST BOMB
FRAGMENTS.
WHAT THEY FOUND IN THE APARTMENT
AND IN THE BACK OF A CAR THAT
THEY CAR JACKED ON THURSDAY
NIGHT WAS SOMETHING THAT
LOOKED... BOMBS THAT LOOKED VERY
MUCH LIKE THE FRAGMENTS THAT
THEY HAD FOUND AT THE SITE... AT
THE TWO BOMBING SITES AT THE
BOSTON MARATHON.
THESE WERE BOMBS WITH A
LOW-GRADE EXPLOSIVE.
WE KNOW THIS FROM THE CRIMINAL
COMPLAINT THAT WAS RELEASED
TODAY.
THE BOMBS WERE A LOW-GRADE
EXPLOSIVE THAT WERE INSIDE THESE
RICE COOKERS OR PRESSURE
COOKERS.
IN FACT, AT ONE POINT DURING
THIS CAR CHASE ON THURSDAY
NIGHT, THEY ACTUALLY LIT ONE OF
THESE KINDS OF BOMBS AND THREW
IT AT POLICE.
IT BECAME, YOU KNOW, AND IT WAS
PARTIALLY EXPLODED SO IT BECAME
MORE EVIDENCE IN THE CASE.
>> Brown: LET ME ASK YOU FINALLY
BRIEFLY, ONE OF THE STRANGE
ASPECTS TO THIS, OF COURSE, IS
THAT IN THE DAYS AFTER THE
BOMBING IT LOOKS AS THOUGH THE
TWO BROTHERS WENT BACK TO LIFE,
WENT BACK TO BUSINESS AS USUAL?
>> THAT'S RIGHT.
WELL, WE KNOW AND WE'VE BEEN
REPORTING FOR A WHILE THAT THE
YOUNGER BROTHER WAS TWEETING.
ONE OF THE LAST THINGS HE
TWEETED A J.Z. LYRIC ON
WEDNESDAY AND ACTUALLY TWEETED
I'M A NO SWEAT KIND OF GUY OR
SOMETHING TO THAT EFFECT.
OR I'M A NO-STRESS GUY.
ON WEDNESDAY HE WENT TO A PARTY.
HE WAS HANGING OUT WITH HIS
FRIENDS.
CLEARLY THEY WERE TRYING TO ACT
AS IF NOTHING HAD HAPPENED.
AND CLEARLY THEY DIDN'T
UNDERSTA JUNDST HOW MUCH
SURVEILLANCE THERE WAS AROUND
THE FINISH LINE.
WHAT WE FOUND OUT IS THEY HAVE
SURVEILLANCE VIDEO THAT IS VERY
CLEAR AND SEEMS TO COMPLETELY
HAVE THE YOUNGER TSARNAEV DEAD
TO RIGHTS ON BEING THERE AT THE
SECOND BOMBING SITE DROPPING HIS
BACKPACK AND HAVING THE BOMB
BLAST JUST MINUTES... JUST
ACTUALLY SECONDS LATER.
>> Brown: N.P.R.'S DINA TEMPLE
RAS TON, THANKS SO MUCH.
>> YOU'RE WELCOME.
THANK Y.OU
>> Ifill: LEGAL QUESTIONS RAISED
BY THE BOSTON BOMBING; A HUNGER
STRIKE AT GUANTANAMO, OLDER
WORKERS STARTING NEW BUSINESSES
AND THE MURDER TRIAL OF A
PHILADELPHIA DOCTOR.
BUT FIRST, THE OTHER NEWS OF THE
DAY.
HERE'S KWAME HOLMAN.
>> Holman: POLICE IN CANADA SAY
THEY'VE BROKEN UP A PLOT TO
DERAIL A PASSENGER TRAIN.
THEY ANNOUNCED TODAY TWO MEN
HAVE BEEN ARRESTED AND CHARGED
WITH PLANNING A TERROR ATTACK.
THE SUSPECTS LIVE IN TORONTO AND
MONTREAL, BUT ARE NOT CANADIAN
CITIZENS.
THEY ALLEGEDLY HAD DIRECTION AND
GUIDANCE FROM AL-QAEDA, BUT THE
PLOT STILL WAS IN THE PLANNING
PHASE.
>> WHILE THE R.C.M.P. BELIEVED
THAT THE ACCUSED HAD THE
CAPACITY AND INTENT TO CARRY OUT
THESE CRIMINAL ACTS, THERE WAS
NO IMMINENT THREAT TO THE
GENERAL PUBLIC, RAIL EMPLOYEES,
TRAIN PASSENGERS OR
INFRASTRUCTURE.
>> Holman: AUTHORITIES SAID THE
PLOT HAD NO CONNECTION TO THE
BOSTON BOMBINGS.
SO FAR, THERE'S NO SIGN OF THE
POISON RICIN AT THE HOME OF A
MISSISSIPPI MAN ACCUSED OF
SENDING TAINTED LETTERS TO
PRESIDENT OBAMA AND A U.S.
SENATOR.
PAUL KEVIN CURTIS HAS DENIED
INVOLVEMENT WITH THE SUSPICIOUS
MAILINGS.
AT A HEARING TODAY, AN F.B.I.
AGENT TESTIFIED A SEARCH FOUND
NO RICIN, OR MATERIALS USED TO
MAKE IT.
A DEFENSE LAWYER SUGGESTED
CURTIS MIGHT HAVE BEEN FRAMED.
THE DEATH TOLL FROM SIX DAYS OF
HEAVY FIGHTING IN AND AROUND
DAMASCUS, SYRIA HAS GROWN TO AT
LEAST 100.
AND, ANTI-GOVERNMENT ACTIVISTS
WARNED TODAY THE NUMBER COULD BE
CLOSER TO 500.
MEANWHILE, DARK PLUMES OF SMOKE
ROSE OVER THE CAPITAL CITY AS
GOVERNMENT TROOPS PRESSED AN
OFFENSIVE.
THEY'RE TRYING TO PUSH BACK
REBEL FORCES.
THERE WAS WORD TODAY FIERCE
FIGHTING IN NORTHEASTERN NIGERIA
KILLED AT LEAST
185 PEOPLE OVER THE WEEKEND.
THE RED CROSS REPORTED THE DEATH
TOLL, BASED ON LOCAL ACCOUNTS.
NIGERIAN AUTHORITIES SAID THE
NUMBER WAS TERRIBLY INFLATED.
THE FIGHTING ERUPTED FRIDAY
BETWEEN GOVERNMENT SOLDIERS AND
ISLAMIST EXTREMISTS KNOWN AS
BOKO HARAM.
IN AFGHANISTAN, THE TALIBAN TOOK
AT LEAST 11 CIVILIANS HOSTAGE
AFTER A TRANSPORT HELICOPTER WAS
FORCED TO MAKE AN EMERGENCY
LANDING.
OFFICIALS SAID EIGHT TURKS AND A
SSIARUN WERE AMONG THE CAPTIVES.
THE CIVILIAN HELICOPTER LANDED
IN STRONG WINDS AND HEAVY RAIN
IN LOGAR PROVINCE.
THE TALIBAN LARGELY CONTROL THAT
REGION.
FLIGHT DELAYS HIT AIRPORTS UP
AND DOWN THE EAST COAST TODAY AS
1,500 AIR TRAFFIC CONTROLLERS
WERE REQUIRED TO TAKE UNPAID
LEAVE.
AIRPORTS IN NEW YORK,
PHILADELPHIA, BALTIMORE AND
WASHINGTON HAD DELAYS OF 15
MINUTES TO TWO HOURS.
IN WASHINGTON, TRANSPORTATION
SECRETARY RAY LAHOOD BLAMED
FEDERAL BUDGET CUTS FROM THE
ON-GOING SEQUESTRATION.
>> SAFETY IS NOT COMPROMISED.
PLANES ARE GUIDED BY PEOPLE,
PILOTS AND WHEN YOU FURLOUGH
SOME PEOPLE THERE WILL HAVE TO
BE SLOWDOWNS AND THAT'S WHAT WE
WARNED ABOUT MONTHS AGO.
>> Holman: THE FEDERAL AVIATION
ADMINISTRATION HAS ORDERED
FURLOUGHS FOR ALL 47,000 AGENCY
EMPLOYEES.
EACH EMPLOYEE LOSES ONE DAY OF
WORK EVERY OTHER WEEK.
FLOODING IN THE MIDWEST EASED
SLIGHTLY TODAY, BUT PROSPECTS OF
MORE RAIN AND SNOW MELT RAISED
CONCERNS FOR THE DAYS AHEAD.
THE HEAVY RAIN OF LAST WEEK
ALREADY HAS CAUSED A NUMBER OF
SWOLLEN RIVERS TO BURST THEIR
BANKS.
TWO LEVEES FAILED EARLY TODAY
ALONG THE WABASH RIVER IN
SOUTHWEST INDIANA.
CREWS ALSO WORKED TO RECOVER
MORE THAN 100 BARGES THAT BROKE
FREE IN THE MISSISSIPPI RIVER.
THE FLOODING IS BLAMED FOR AT
LEAST THREE DEATHS.
PRESIDENT OBAMA WILL ATTEND A
MEMORIAL SERVICE THURSDAY FOR
THE 14 PEOPLE KILLED IN THE
TEXAS FERTILIZER PLANT
EXPLOSION.
WHITE HOUSE OFFICIALS SAID TODAY
THE PRESIDENT ALREADY PLANNED TO
BE IN TEXAS, TO HELP DEDICATE
THE GEORGE W. BUSH PRESIDENTIAL
LIBRARY.
MOST OF THE VICTIMS IN THE
EXPLOSION IN WEST, TEXAS WERE
FIREFIGHTERS AND MEDICAL
TECHNICIANS.
A U.S. ARMY SERGEANT PLEADED
GUILTY TODAY TO KILLING FIVE
OTHER AMERICANS IN IRAQ IN 2009.
SERGEANT JOHN RUSSELL ADMITTED
HE GUNNED DOWN FOUR U.S.
SOLDIERS AND A NAVY OFFICER  AT
A MENTAL HEALTH CLINIC NEAR
BAGHDAD.
AT THE TIME, RUSSELL WAS NEARING
THE END OF HIS THIRD TOUR IN
IRAQ.
THE GUILTY PLEA MEANS HE WILL
AVOID A DEATH SENTENCE.
FOLK SINGER RICHY HAVEN HAS
DIED.
HIS FAMILY SAID HE SUFFERED A
HEART ATTACK TODAY.
HE CAME FROM THE NEW YORK FOLK
SCENE IN 1960s.
IN 1969 HE PERFORMED AT THE
ORIGINAL WOODSTOCK FESTIVAL,
WELCOMING THOUSANDS OF PEOPLE TO
THE EVENT.
RICHY HAVENS WAS 72 YEARS OLD.
WALL STREET MANAGED TO RALLY A
BIT TODAY, AFTER BIG LOSSES LAST
WEEK.
THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
GAINED 19 POINTS TO CLOSE AT
14,567.
THE NASDAQ ROSE 27 POINTS TO
CLOSE AT 3,233.
THOSE ARE SOME OF THE DAY'S
MAJOR STORIES.
NOW, BACK TO GWEN.
>> Ifill: AND WE PICK UP ON SOME
OF THE LEGAL QUESTIONS BEING
ASKED ABOUT THE CRIMINAL CASE
AGAINST AGAINST DZHOKHAR
TSARNAEV.
IF TSARNYEV IS FOUND GUILTY AS
CHARGED OF USING A WEAPON OF
MASS DESTRUCTION, HE COULD FACE
THE DEATH PENALTY.
BUT WHAT ELSE DOES HE, AND
SHOULD HE FACE?
FOR THAT, WE TURN TO, DAVID
RIVKIN, WHO SERVED IN THE
JUSTICE DEPARTMENT IN THE REAGAN
AND BUSH ADMINISTRATIONS.
AND LAURA MURPHY, DIRECTOR OF
THE WASHINGTON LEGISLATIVE
OFFICE FOR THE AMERICAN CIVIL
LIBERTIES UNION.
DAVID RIVKIN, START BY
EXPLAINING TO US WHAT THIS
MEANS.
USING A WEAPON OF MASS
DESTRUCTION.
IS IT A TERM OF LEGAL ART?
>> IT IS A TERM OF ART, GWEN.
GOOD TO BE WITH YOU.
ISIT OBVIOUSLY A MANIFESTATION
OF THE SERIOUSNESS OF THE
ATTACK.
IT IS A CHARGE THAT CARRIES A
DEATH PENALTY, AND I FOR ONE,
GIVEN THE WEALTH OF PHYSICAL
EVIDENCE AND EVIDENCE THAT THE
PROSECUTION WILL BE ABLE TO
BRING TO BEAR, WOULD BE QUITE
COMFORTABLE PREDICTING THAT HE
WOULD BE CONVICTED AND SENTENCED
APPROPRIATELY.
>> Ifill: LAURA MURPHY, THAT
TERM "WEAPON OF MASS
DESTRUCTION," IS THAT RELATIVELY
NEW KIND OF CHARGE?
>> YEAH, THAT'S IN STATUTE.
CONGRESS CREATED THAT TERM.
IT'S A VERY BROAD TERM.
AND IT'S BEEN BROADLY
INTERPRETED.
>> Ifill: IS PART OF THE BROAD
INTERPRETATION WHAT THE PENALTY
WOULD BE?
>> I DON'T UNDERSTAND YOUR
QUESTION.
>> Ifill: AS DAVID RIVKIN JUST
SAID PART OF THE REASON WHY THAT
KIND OF CHARGE IS BROUGHT IS
BECAUSE IT MAKES YOU LIABLE FOR
THE DEATH PENALTY.
>> WELL, WE DON'T KNOW WHETHER
THE FEDERAL PROSECUTORS ARE
GOING TO CHARGE THIS SUSPECT
WITH THE DEATH PENALTY.
SO IT IS A PROSECUTION THAT CAN
RESULT IN A DEATH SENTENCE.
>> Ifill: LET ME ASK YOU AND
THEN DAVID RIVKIN THIS QUESTION,
WERE THERE OTHER OPTIONS BESIDES
THIS PARTICULAR CHARGE FOR
CHARGING THIS YOUNG MAN?
>> OH, THERE ARE MANY OPTIONS.
BUT WE DON'T KNOW THAT THE
CHARGES THAT ARE BROUGHT HAVE
BEEN COMPLETED.
THIS INDIVIDUAL COULD BE
PROSECUTED IN STATE COURT.
THIS INDIVIDUAL COULD FACE
FURTHER FEDERAL CHARGES.
SO THIS, BY NO MEANS, MEANS THE
END OF THE CHARGING PROCESS.
>> Ifill: DAVID RIVKIN, WHAT
ELSE COULD YOU IMAGINE THAT HE
COULD BE CHARGED WITH BASED ON
WHAT WE KNOW.
>> IF I MAY, GWEN, IT'S NOT JUST
A QUESTION OF WHAT HE WILL BE
CHARGED WITH.
THERE ARE OTHER CHARGES I AGREE
WITH MY COLLEAGUE ABOUT THE
POSSIBILITY OF STATE
PROSECUTIONS.
I THINK WHAT'S IMPORTANT, THIS
ADMINISTRATION HAS MADE A
SERIOUS MISTAKE IS NOT
CONSIDERING, COMPLETELY TAKING
OFF THE TABLE, THE POSSIBILITY
OF CLASSIFYING HIM AS A
POTENTIAL ENEMY COMBATANT AND
SUBJECTING HIM TO THE
INTERROGATION PROCESS THAT WOULD
HAVE FRANKLY YIELDED A LOT MORE
IN TERMS OF INTELLIGENCE THAN
THE STANDARD CRIMINAL JUSTICE
TYPE INTERROGATION PROCESS.
IT HAS NOTHING TO DO WITH
MIRANDA ON WHICH EVERYBODY HAS
BEEN FOCUSING.
IT IS SIMPLY THE CASE THAT AN
INTERROGATION PROCESS THAT WOULD
LAST FOR A PERIOD OF WEEKS AND
MAYBE MONTHS AND ENABLES THE
INTERROGATION TEAM TO DEVELOP
WITHOUT ANY INTERRUPTIONS A FULL
INTELLIGENCE TAKE.
IT IS NOT SOMETHING YOU DO IN A
CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM BECAUSE
ONCE HE'S CHARGED, HE'S ENTITLED
TO A LAWYER.
AND HIS LAWYER, EVEN IF HE DOES
NOT TELL HIM NOT TO COOPERATE,
YOU JUST WOULDN'T BE ABLE TO
STRUCTURE THE INTERROGATION IN
THE SAME PROCESS.
THAT'S A LOSS.
THAT'S VERY UNFORTUNATE.
>> Ifill: LAURA MURPHY, IN FACT,
HE HAS NOW BEEN ASSIGNED A
LAWYER.
THIS ENEMY COMBATANT OPTION WAS
PRETTY VIGOROUSLY TAKEN OFF THE
TABLE TODAY BY JAY CARNEY AT THE
WHITE HOUSE.
WHAT DID YOU THINK ABOUT THAT?
>> WE THOUGHT IT WAS AN
EXCELLENT IDEA TO PROSECUTE THIS
INDIVIDUAL IN THE CRIMINAL
JUSTICE SYSTEM IN OUR FEDERAL
COURTS.
>> Ifill: WHY?
BECAUSE THE ENEMY COMBATANT
STATUS DOES NOT ALLOW FOR DUE
PROCESS, DOES NOT ALLOW FOR
RIGHT TO COUNSEL, DOES NOT HAVE
THE SAME PRESUMPTION OF
INNOCENCE, AND WE HOLD OUR
SYSTEM OUT TO THE WORLD AS BEING
THE MODEL FOR JUSTICE.
THAT IS A VERY DIFFERENT
SECRETIVE PROCESS.
IN FACT, JOHN BRENNAN, WHO IS
NOW THE DIRECTOR OF THE C.I.A.,
WHEN HE WAS NATIONAL SECURITY
ADVISOR ARGUED AGAINST HOLDING
PEOPLE AS ENEMY COMBATANTS AND
IN MILITARY DETENTION FOR THE
PURPOSES OF INTERROGATION
BECAUSE HE CITED AT LEAST THREE
MAJOR TERRORISM CASES WHERE THE
INDIVIDUALS WERE TRIED UNDER OUR
FEDERAL CRIMINAL COURT SYSTEM
AND THEY COOPERATED EVEN AFTER
HAVING COUNSEL.
AND THIS SYSTEM, THIS CRIMINAL
JUSTICE SYSTEM OF OUR FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT, HAS PROSECUTED OVER
400 TERRORISM-RELATED CASES.
YOU HAVE THE BLIND SHEIK IN
CUSTODY.
YOU HAVE MASOWI IN CUSTODY.
YOU ARE TERRY NICHOLS WHO WAS
PART OF THE OKLAHOMA CITY
BOMBING.
YOU HAVE ERIC RUDOLPH WHO WAS
PART OF THE ATLANTA TERRORISM
BOMBING RELATED TO THE OLYMPICS.
SO THERE'S NO PROBLEM IN OUR
CRIMINAL JUSTICE PROSECUTING
ALLEGED ACTS OF TERRORISM.
>> Ifill: WHAT ABOUT THAT, DAVID
RIVKIN?
>> LET ME JUST JUMP IN.
THIS IS A STRAWMAN.
NOBODY IS SUGGESTING THAT
DZHOKHAR CAN NOT BE PROSECUTED
IN THE CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM.
BUT PROSECUTING HIM IS JUST PART
OF THE EQUATION.
THE REAL QUESTION FOR US IS
THIS: THIS IS NOT JUST AN ACT OF
TERROR.
THIS IS AN ACT OF WAR.
AT LEAST POTENTIALLY AN ACT OF
WAR ON THE THEORY THAT HIS
BROTHER WAS INDUCTED IN AL QAEDA
AFFILIATED ENTITY AND HE CAME
BACK DURING HIS STAY, HE CAME
BACK TO THE UNITED STATES AND
INDUCTED HIS BROTHER.
>> Ifill: SO FAR WE KNOW THAT
ALL TO BE A THEORY, RIGHT?
>> OF COURSE.
THAT'S THE WHOLE POINT.
THE WHOLE POINT OF ENEMY
COMBATANTS IS THAT YOU HOLD
PEOPLE AND YOU BUILD INFORMATION
IN PART BASED UPON INTERROGATION
RESULTS.
BY THE WAY A POINT MADE MY
COLLEAGUE.
THERE'S NOTHING WRONG WITH THE
MILITARY JUSTICE SYSTEM.
IF SHE FEELS OTHERWISE SHE
SHOULD TAKE ISSUE WITH THE
SUPREME COURT.
THE SUPREME COURT IN A NUMBER OF
DECISIONS PRIOR TO 9/11 AND
AFTER 9/11 IN A CASE CALLED
HAMDI VERY MUCH AFFIRMED THE
THE LAWS.
I'M NOT SUGGESTING BY THE WAY...
FORGIVE ME JUST ONE SECOND.
I'M NOT SUGGESTING HE WOULD HAVE
BEEN PROSECUTED IN THE MILITARY
COMMISSION.
THE EXISTING LAW DOES NOT ALLOW
FOR IT.
IT SPECIFICALLY IS OFF THE
TABLE.
BUT HE COULD HAVE BEEN
INTERROGATED AND HELD FOR A
NUMBER OF MONTHS AS AN ENEMY
COMBATANT AND JUST LIKE HAPPENED
TO OTHERS, HE COULD HAVE BEEN
TRANSFERRED TO THE CRIMINAL
JUSTICE SYSTEM TO BE PROSECUTED.
>> Ifill: EXCUSE ME.
SINCE WE NO KNEW THAT IS NOT
GOING TO HAPPEN AND THE
ADMINISTRATION HAS MADE VERY
CLEAR WHAT THEIR APPROACH WILL
BE I WOULD LIKE TO FOCUS ON THE
CHALLENGES NOW AHEAD FOR THE
PROSECUTORS AND FOR THE DEFENSE
IN A CASE LIKE THAT.
LAURA MURPHY.
>> FIRST OF ALL, THEY HAVE TO
GET THEIR FACTS TOGETHER.
WE JUST DON'T KNOW WHAT THE
FACTS ARE IN THIS CASE.
WE CANNOT SAY THAT THIS
INDIVIDUAL AGREED WITH HIS OLDER
BROTHER'S IDEOLOGICAL BELIEFS.
WE DON'T KNOW THAT.
SO THIS PERSON HAS COUNSEL.
COUNSEL IS GOING TO MEET WITH
THIS PERSON TO MAKE SURE THAT
THE CHARGES ARE FAIR AND BUILD A
CASE BASED ON THE FACTS.
WE CAN'T PREDICT HOW THIS CASE
IS GOING TO GO.
WE KNOW THAT THE FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT HAS TO CONFORM WITH
RULES OF EVIDENCE AND WE THINK
THAT THEY ARE GOING ABOUT THIS
PROSECUTION IN THE MANNER THAT
REALLY COMPORTS WITH OUR
AMERICAN VALUES AND OUR
CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS.
>> Ifill: DAVID RIVKIN.
'M SURPRISED ACTUALLY TO
HEAR YOU SAY THAT BECAUSE QUITE
FRANKLY IN AN EFFORT TO AVOID
DEALING WITH THE OPTION THAT I
MENTIONED BY NOT MIRANDAIZING
HIM, THEY HAVE ACTUALLY CREATED
SOME PROBLEMS FOR THEMSELVES.
>> HE WAS MIRANDAIZED.
Ifill: AS OF TODAY WHEN HE
WAS CHARGED HE WAS.
>> YES.
Ifill: BUT THERE WAS A DELAY,
YOU'RE RIGHT.
>> THERE WAS A DELAY.
I AGREE WITH PROFESSOR WHO
POINTS OUT THE DANGER OF THIS
KIND OF A BLENDING OF TWO
PARADIGMS BECAUSE HE WAS NOT
MIRANDAIZED INITIALLY IT MAY BE
DIFFICULT FOR THE PROSECUTION...
LOTS OF PHYSICAL EVIDENCE, AS I
SAID.
BUT AS FAR AS HIS STATE OF MIND,
AS FAR AS WHAT MADE HIM DO
THIS -- AND I AGREE WITH LAURA,
THERE MIGHT BE SOME DIFFICULTIES
WHICH AGAIN UNDERSCORES THE
PROPOSITION THAT YOU PAY A PRICE
WHEN YOU TAKE SOME OPTIONS OFF
THE TABLE.
YOU MAKE OTHER OPTIONS MORE
DIFFICULT FOR YOU.
>> Ifill: EVEN THOUGH HE WASN'T
MIRANDAIZED RIGHT AWAY AND WAS
IN COMMUNICATION WITH THE
INVESTIGATORS ARE YOU OKAY WITH
THAT?
>> NO, WE'RE NOT OKAY BECAUSE WE
DON'T KNOW THE FACTS.
WE DON'T KNOW WHAT HE WAS
COMPELLED TO ANSWER.
WE DON'T KNOW WHETHER HE KNEW
WHAT WAS GOING ON, WHETHER HE
WAS OF SOUND ENOUGH MIND.
WE THINK THE PUBLIC SAFETY
EXCEPTION SHOULD BE VERY, VERY
LIMITED.
WE DON'T KNOW WHETHER THEY
ABUSED THE PUBLIC SAFETY
EXCEPTION.
WE'RE NOT PREPARED TO SAY
EVERYTHING IS OKAY JUST BECAUSE
HE'S BEEN MIRANDAIZED BUT WE ARE
RELIEVED HE'S BEING TRIED IN
FEDERAL COURT AND THAT HE WAS
MIRANDAIZED.
>> Ifill: LAURA MURPHY OF THE
AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION
AND DAVID RIVKIN, THANK YOU BOTH
SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Brown: WE TURN NOW TO THE
DETENTION CENTER AT GUANTANAMO
BAY, CUBA, WHERE A PROTEST BY
PRISONERS CONTINUES TO GROW.
RAY SUAREZ REPORTS.
>> Suarez: MORE THAN HALF THE
DETAINEES AT THE GUANTANAMO
PRISON ARE NOW ON HUNGER STRIKE.
GOVERNMENT FIGURES DISCLOSED
THIS WEEKEND SHOW THAT 84 OF THE
166 CAPTIVES AT THE FACILITY ARE
NOW PARTICIPATING.
A SMALLER NUMBER BEGAN THE
PROTEST IN EARLY FEBRUARY.
THEY OBJECTED TO THEIR LIVING
CONDITIONS, AND TO ALLEGED
MISHANDLING OF THE KORAN BY
MILITARY GUARDS.
THEY ALSO CITED THE LEGAL LIMBO
MANY HAVE BEEN HELD IN FOR A
DECADE OR MORE, NOT CHARGED WITH
CRIMES OR PLACED ON TRIAL.
ON APRIL 13, THERE WAS A BRIEF,
VIOLENT CONFRONTATION.
THE MILITARY SAID GUARDS RAIDED
A COMMUNAL AREA TO UNCOVER
SECURITY CAMERAS AND WINDOWS
THAT HAD BEEN SHROUDED FOR
WEEKS.
>> WE WERE TRYING TO BE PATIENT
AND WORK WITH THEM AND GIVE THEM
THE OPPORTUNITY TO COMPLY.
WE HIT THE POINT WHERE, YOU
KNOW, I FELT WE WERE ACCEPTING
TOO MUCH RISK AND IT WAS TIME TO
TAKE ACTION.
>> Suarez: THE GUARDS SAY THE
PRISONERS ATTACKED THEM WITH
HOMEMADE WEAPONS.
THERE WERE NO REPORTED SERIOUS
INJURIES, BUT THE PRISON WAS PUT
ON LOCKDOWN, AND THE NUMBER OF
HUNGER STRIKERS SKYROCKETED.
16 ARE BEING FORCE-FED, WITH
TUBES INSERTED THROUGH THE NOSE
AND INTO THE STOMACH.
THEY ARE TICALYPLY SHACKLED IN
CHAIRS LIKE THIS FOR THE
PROCEDURE.
AN AMERICAN NAVAL MEDICAL
OFFICER DESCRIBED THE PROCESS IN
2009.
>> THESE ARE THE FEEDING TUBES
THAT WE USE, WHENEVER IT IS
DETERMINED AT A VERY HIGH LEVEL.
EVERYONE IS ALLOWED TO HUNGER
STRIKE; THAT IS THEIR RIGHTOT
PROTEST.
IF SOMEBODY GETS TO THAT POINT
WHERE THEY NEED ADDITIONAL
MEDICAL CARE OR THREATENING
LIFE, THAT'S WHERE THE DECISION
IS MADE-- WAY ABOVE ME-- TO STEP
IN.
>> Suarez: AMONG THOSE BEING
FORCE-FED IS SAMIR NAJI AL HASAN
MOQBEL OF YEMEN.
IN A RECENT "NEW YORK TIMES" OP-
ED, TOLD TO HIS LAWYERS THROUGH
AN INTERPRETER, HE WROTE:
IN ALL, 86 MEN REMAIN AT
GUANTANAMO, WHO HAVE BEEN
CLEARED FOR RELEASE FROM THE
FACILITY, 56 WITHOUT
RESTRICTIONS; ANOTHER 30 WITH
CONDITIONS.
ALL THIS, DESPITE THE FACT
PRESIDENT OBAMA SIGNED AN
EXECUTIVE ORDER TO CLOSE THE
MILITARY PRISON AT GUANTANAMO
BAY, MORE THAN FOUR YEARS AGO.
BUT CONGRESS HAS BLOCKED THE
TRANSFER OF ANY DETAINEES TO THE
MAINLAND U.S.
AND SOME, LIKE THE YEMENI
MOQBEL, ARE MEN WITHOUT
COUNTRIESTHEI: R NATIVE NATIONS
HAVE REFUSED TO TAKE THEM BACK.
SEVERAL HIGH-LEVEL AL QAIDA
DETAINEES, LIKE 9/11 PLANNER
KHALID SHEIKH MOHAMMAD, ARE
AMONG THE FEW FACING MILITARY
TRIAL AT THE PRISON.
FOR MORE ON THE HUNGER STRIKE,
I'M JOINED BY A REPORTER WHO'S
LOGGED MORE HOURS IN GUANTANAMO
THAN ANY OTHER JOURNALIST, CAROL
ROSENBERG OF THE "MIAMI HERALD."
CAROL, WELCOME.
MORE THAN A DOZEN ARE NOW BEING
FORCE-FED.
HOW IS THE DETERMINATION MADE
WHICH PRISONERS ARE RESTRAINED
AND FED BY FORCE?
>> THE MILITARY SAYS THEY HAVE A
CALCULUS THAT LOOKS AT HOW MUCH
WEIGHT HAS BEEN LOST, HOW MUCH
MALNUTRITION EXISTS IN AN
INDIVIDUAL, AND BASICALLY HOW
SICK THEY ARE.
THEY CAN SKIP MEALS FOR DAYS ON
END, BUT THERE'S A POINT AT
WHICH WHEN THEIR WEIGHT DROPS
DOWN TO A CERTAIN PERCENTAGE
BELOW HEALTHY BODY WEIGHT THAT
THEY START THE FORCE-FEEDING.
>> Suarez: OF THE SCORES WHO ARE
ON HUNGER STRIKE, HOW LONG HAVE
THE LONGEST PRISONERS BEEN
DENYING THEMSELVES FOOD?
>> WELL, RAY, THERE'S ONE MAN
DOWN THERE WHO HAS BEEN DOING
THIS HUNGER STRIKE SINCE ABOUT
2005.
HE'S BEEN LIVING OFF THESE
TUBE-FEEDINGS FOR YEARS AND
YEARS.
THIS HAS BEEN A SINGULAR
PROTEST.
WHAT'S GOING ON NOW IS THAT THIS
CURRENT HUNGER STRIKER, HUNGER
STRIKE STARTED PROBABLY IN
FEBRUARY.
WHEN THE DETAINEES SAY THAT THEY
HAD A PARTICULARLY AGGRESSIVE
SEARCH BY THE GUARDS IN WHICH
THEY PERCEIVED THAT THE GUARDS
WERE HAVING THE LINK QUIST
INSPECT THEIR KORANS WHICH
APPARENTLY UNCORKED ALL SORTS OF
FRUSTRATION AND LED TO THIS
LATEST HUNGER STRIKE.
>> Suarez: ARE THERE IN THE
INTERNATIONAL TREATIES THAT
GOVERN THE WAY PRISONERS ARE
TREATED AREAS THAT -- PARTS,
CHAPTERS, WHATEVER -- THAT COVER
FORCE-FEEDING?
>> WELL, YOU KNOW, THE HEAD OF
THE INTERNATIONAL RED CROSS
TELLS US THAT THEY OPPOSE
FORCE-FEEDING.
ACTUALLY PRISONERS DO HAVE THE
RIGHT TO A CERTAIN MEASURE OF
SELF-DETERMINATION.
ONE OF THE THINGS THAT THEY CAN
DO IS CHOOSE NOT TO EAT.
THE PENTAGON HAS A DIFFERENT
POLICY.
WHAT THEY SAY IS THAT THEY'VE
DEVELOPED THESE FORCE-FEEDING
PROTOCOLS FROM THE FEDERAL
BUREAU OF PRISONS YEARS AGO WHEN
THEY WERE FIRST CONFRONTED WITH
THE HUNGER STRIKES.
SO THERE ARE INTERNATIONAL HUMAN
RIGHTS AND MEDICAL ORGANIZATIONS
THAT SAY WHAT THE U.S. IS DOING
DOWN THERE, FEEDING THEM TWICE A
DAY WITH THESE TUBES TETHERED UP
THEIR NOSE, DOWN THE BACK OF
THEIR THROAT AND INTO THEIR
STOMACH, TWICE A DAY, THERE ARE
ORGANIZATIONS THAT SAY THIS IS
WRONG, THAT THEY SHOULD BE
ALLOWED TO CHOOSE TO STARVE TO
DEATH IF THEY WANT TO.
>> Suarez: RECENTLY THERE WAS A
RAID IN THE PRISON ITSELF.
WHAT WERE THE CONDITIONS THAT
PREVAILED IN THE SO-CALLED
COMMUNAL AREAS?
WHAT HAD THE AUTHORITIES AT
GUANTANAMO ALLOWED LIFE TO
BECOME FOR MANY OF THE
DETAINEES?
>> THIS RAID TOOK PLACE IN THE
SHOW CASE COMMUNAL PRISON, CAMP
6.
THIS WAS A PLACE WHERE... WHICH
WAS CLOSEST TO A P.O.W. CAMP
THAN ANYTHING THAT HAD EVER
EXISTED AT GUANTANAMO.
DETAINEES LIVED IN GROUPS OF 10,
12, MAYBE 18 AT A TIME.
THEY ATE TOGETHER AT PICNIC
TABLES.
THEY PRAYED TOGETHER.
THEY WERE ABLE TO SIT AROUND AND
WATCH TELEVISION TOGETHER.
THEY HAD FREE MOVEMENT FROM
INSIDE THE BUILDING WHERE THE
PICNIC TABLES WERE OUT TO
ENCLOSED RECREATION YARDS
OUTSIDE.
SO THIS WAS A FAIR AMOUNT OF
ENCLOSED FREEDOM WITH THE GUARDS
ON THE OUTSIDE LOOKING IN.
THEY WOULD WATCH THROUGH
CAMERAS, MONITORS AND THEY WOULD
WATCH FROM OUTSIDE THE FENCES.
SOME OF THEM WHICH WERE ACTUAL
FENCES.
WHAT WE WERE TOLD WHEN WE WENT
DOWN THERE LAST WEEK IS THAT THE
DETAINEES BEGAN TO DEFY THEIR
GUARDS IN MANY, MANY WAYS OVER
THE MONTHS.
AMONG OTHER THINGS, I WAS TOLD
LAST WEEK TO MY SURPRISE BECAUSE
I HAD BEEN THERE THE MONTH
BEFORE, SOME OF THE PRISONERS
HAD TAKEN STICKS AND WERE POKING
THE GUARDS THROUGH THE FENCES.
YOU KNOW, THEY HAD BROOMS THERE
WHICH THEY COULD USE TO SWEEP
OUT THEIR CELLS SO THEY
APPARENTLY TOOK THESE BROOM
STICKS AND WERE POKING THE
GUARDS AND PROVOKING THEM.
THEY REFUSED TO EAT.
THEY REFUSED TO ALLOW THE FOOD
CARTS TO COME INSIDE THESE
COMMUNAL AREAS.
THEY CONTROLLED WHAT CAME IN AND
WENT OUT.
MOST IMPORTANTLY, THEY TOOK OLD
CEREAL BOXES AND THEY COVERED UP
THE CAMERAS IN THEIR INDIVIDUAL
CELLS.
AND THIS WAS THE THING THAT MOST
CONCERNED THE PENTAGON AND THE
MILITARY THAT WAS RUNNING THE
PLACE.
IF THEY COULDN'T LOOK INSIDE
INDIVIDUAL CELLS, IF THEY
COULDN'T KEEP AN EYE ON
DETAINEES IN THE CORNERS OF
THESE COLLECTIVE AREAS, THEY
FEARED THAT SOMEBODY WOULD TRY A
SUICIDE OR SOMEBODY WAS STARVING
HIMSELF AND WASTING AWAY AND
THAT THEY COULDN'T KEEP EYES ON
HIM TO REALIZE THAT THEY HAD TO
FORCE FEED THEM.
SO THEY MADE A DECISION AFTER
SEVERAL MONTHS OF THIS KIND OF
DEFIANCE OF THE RULES, THEY WENT
IN ON APRIL 13 RIGHT BEFORE DAWN
WITH THESE STRIKE FORCES.
TWO OF THE TEAMS HAD SHOTGUNS
WITH RUBBER PELLETS.
THEY ALL HAD SHIELDS AND THEY
HAD HELMETS.
THEY CHARGED INSIDE THE
RECREATION YARDS WHERE ACCORDING
TO THE MILITARY THEY MIGHT SOME
RESISTANCE.
IT WASN'T LONG.
THEY DESCRIBED INJURIES TO BOTH
SIDES THAT WERE NOT SERIOUS, BUT
PEOPLE ON BOTH SIDES GOT HURT.
AND THE GUARD FORCE CAME IN AND
PUSHED EACH ONE INTO INDIVIDUAL
CELLS.
THEY ARE NOW IN LOCKDOWN.
THEY ARE NOW INSIDE THESE
ROUGHLY 8X12 CELLS, UP TO 22
HOURS A DAY BEING MOVED AND
SHACKLED FROM THESE CELLS TO
SMALL RECREATION YARDS, BEING
MOVED FROM THESE CELLS TO
SHOWERS.
THEY HAVE LOST THE ABILITY TO
CONTROL THEIR LIVES INSIDE THESE
COMMUNAL BLOCKS.
THEY'RE IN WHAT THEY CALL
LOCKDOWN.
IT'S A VERY DIFFERENT GUANTANAMO
THAN THE ONE WE HAD SEEN
THROUGHOUT MUCH OF THE OBAMA
ADMINISTRATION.
THIS IS MUCH MORE OF A DOCTRINE
OF KEEPING PEOPLE IN INDIVIDUAL
CELLS SIMILAR TO WHAT WENT ON
DURING THE BUSH YEARS.
>> Suarez: CAROL ROSENBERG OF
THE MIAMI HERALD, THANKS FOR
JOINING US.
>> THANK YOU, RAY.
>> Brown: ONLINE LATER TONIGHT,
YOU CAN SEE ADDITIONAL EXCERPTS
FROM RAY'S INTERVIEW WITH CAROL
ROSENBERG, INCLUDING MORE ON
THOSE 86 DETAINEES, CLEARED FOR
RELEASE, WHO REMAIN AT
GUANTANAMO.
>> Ifill: NOW, ECONOMICS
CORRESPONDENT PAUL SOLMAN
REPORTS ON LATE-BLOOMING
SELF-STARTERS.
IT'S THE LATEST CHAPTER IN HIS
LOOK AT OLDER WORKERS IN THE
AMERICAN ECONOMY AND ALL
PART OF HIS ON-GOING REPORTING
"MAKING SENSE OF FINANCIAL
NEWS."
>> LOOK AT THIS NICE, TIGHT
STOMACH WITH THE ABS WHICH YOU
COULD GRATE CHEESE ON.
>> Reporter: AT 55, JUDI
HENDERSON-TOWNSEND IS WORKING
WITH A MUCH YOUNGER CROWD.
>> IT'S LIKE LIVING IN THE LAND
OF DORIAN GRAY HERE.
NOBODY EVER AGES.
>> Reporter: AFTER A CAREER
SPENT WORKING WITH STIFFS IN THE
CORPORATE WORLD, SAYS TOWNSEND,
SHE STARTED MANNEQUIN MADNESS.
>> I SELL MANNEQUINS, I RENT
MANNEQUINS, I REPAIR MANNEQUINS,
I BLOG ABOUT MANNEQUINS.
HERE IN OUR WAREHOUSE, WE
RECYCLE THEM FOR THE STORES FOR
FREE AND THEN WE RESELL THEM OR
RENT THEM TO OTHER PEOPLE.
>> Reporter: SO YOU MEAN ALL
THOSE GOOD LOOKING FOLK BACK
THERE WERE GOING TO BE DUMPED.
>> THOSE WERE GOING TO BE TOSSED
INTO THE LANDFILL BECAUSE THE
STORE DIDN'T NEED THEM ANYMORE.
THEY'RE JUST MAYBE A FEW YEARS
OLD, BUT STRUCTURALLY NOTHING IS
WRONG WITH THEM.
IT'S LIKE HAVING A PRE-OWNED
LEXUS.
>> Reporter: TOWNSEND THINKS
SHE'S MODELING A TREND: THE RSEI
OF THE MATURE ENTREPRENEUR.
AND INDEED, SINCE 1996, THE
SHARE OF BUSINESSOWNERS AGE 55
TO 64 HAS GROWN MORE THAN 9%.
AND WHEREAS JUST ONE TENTH OF
THE TOTAL U.S. WORKFORCE IS SELF
EMPLOYED.
>> YOU LOOK AT WORKERS IN THEIR
MID 50s, IT'S 15%.
YOU LOOK AT WORKERS 65, 66, 67,
68, YOU'RE UP AT 25%.
>> Reporter: UNIVERSITY OF
SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA ECONOMIST
JULIE ZISSIMOPOULOS HAS STUDIED
OLDISH ENTREPRENEURS.
>> THEY'RE MORE EDUCATED, THEY
HAVE HIGHER INCOME AND WEALTH.
THEY ARE MORE WILLING TO TAKE ON
RISKS.
THEY'VE HAD LOTS OF ON THE JOB
TRAINING, LOTS OF WORKFORCE
EXPERIENCE.
THEY CAN BRING ALL OF THIS INTO
THE DEVELOPMENT OF A NEW
BUSINESS OR A NEW SERVICE.
>> Reporter: TOWNSEND'S PENCHANT
FOR DUMMIES BEGAN AS A HOBBY.
SHE LOOKED ON CRAIGSLIST FOR A
MANNEQUIN TO PUT IN HER GARDEN,
ENDED UP BUYING 50 OF THEM, AND
STARTED RENTING THEM OUT AS A
SIDE GIG.
SOON HER UNLIKELY BUSINESS WAS
BOOMING.
SO THE LONGTIME SALES EXECUTIVE
DECIDED TO GIVE FULL-TIME SELF-
EMPLOYMENT A TRY.
>> I THINK BEING THE AGE I AM IS
AN ADVANTAGE.
NUMBER ONE, I WOULD HAVE NEVER
HAD THE CONFIDENCE TO STEP OUT
ON SUCH A CRAZY VENTURE LIKE
THIS IN MY YOUTH.
AND ALSO BECAUSE I BRING A LOT
OF MY PREVIOUS EXPERIENCE.
IT'S JUST ABOUT MARKETING AND
SALES RIGHT?
I JUST HAPPEN TO HAVE A KIND OF
AN UNUSUAL PRODUCT.
>> Reporter: IT'S TAKEN PLENTY
OF LEGWORK, BUT MANNEQUIN
MADNESS NOW SELLS OR RENTS MORE
THAN 200,000 BODIES AND LIMBS
ANNUALLY AND IS AN ENVIRONMENTAL
LEADER, RECYCLING 100,000 POUNDS
OF NON-FLESH A YEAR.
ONE KEY TO GROWTH: MARKETING THE
MANNEQUINS ONLINE WITH HELP FROM
CONSULTANT CYNTHIA MACKEY.
>> WHAT I LIKE TO RECOMMEND IS
KNOW WHERE YOUR AUDIENCE IS AND
WHAT DO THEY LIKE TO DO ONLINE?
SO WITH YOU, PINTEREST HAS BEEN
WILDLY SUCCESSFUL.
>> Reporter: NOW YOU MIGHT
EXPECT THE SOCIAL MEDIA GURU TO
BE ON THE YOUNG SIDE.
BUT MACKEY TOO IS IN HER 50s, AS
IS THE TARGET AUDIENCE FOR HER
BUSINESS.
>> BABY BOOMER BUSINESS OWNER
WORKSHOPS, AND THEY'RE DESIGNED
TO HELP THOSE WHO ARE NON-
TECHNICAL OR FEEL OVERWHELMED BY
TECH TO DO THEIR JOBS BETTER
ONLINE.
>> Reporter: CYNTHIA MACKEY IS
CAPITALIZING ON THE LATE BLOOMER
SELF EMPLOYMENT BOOM, SELF-
EMPLOYED HERSELF, SHE KNOWS THE
DRAW.
>> YOU'RE NOT WORKING FOR
SOMEONE ELSE AND YOU GET TO TAKE
THAT VALUE FOR YOUR BENEFIT, IF
I WANT TO TAKE MY MOM OUT FOR
BREAKFAST, I CAN SCHEDULE THAT
AND THEN WORK LONGER HOURS IN
THE EVENING.
SO HAVING CONTROL OF MY TIME OR
THE ABILITY TO SCHEDULE THINGS,
THAT THAT'S WONDERFUL AS YOU GET
OLDER I THINK.
>> Reporter: BUT NOT EVERYONE
CHOOSES SELF-EMPLOYMENT.
TO MANY, THE GREAT RECESSION
OFFERED FEW OTHER OPTIONS.
>> ON MY 65th BIRTHDAY MY BOSS
COMES INTO MY OFFICE AND TELLS
ME I'M NO LONGER NEEDED AND THAT
WAS NOT THE BIRTHDAY PRESENT I
EXPECTED.
>> Reporter: MICHAEL GROTTOLA
WAS ONE OF THIRTY SENIOR LEVEL
EMPLOYEES CUT LOOSE.
THE OUTPLACEMENT COUNSELORS
ADVICE?
>> HE SAID, MIKE, THERE ARE JUST
SO MANY THRONES AND THERE'S TOO
MANY PRINCES.
THAT'S THE STATE OF OUR ECONOMY
IN 2009.
AND HE WAS IN NO WAY ENCOURAGING
THAT I SHOULD EVEN TRY TO LOOK
FOR WORK.
THE GREY HAIR, THE HIGH SALARY,
ALL THAT STUFF.
I MEAN, THEY CAN'T SAY THOSE
THINGS BUT DON'T TELL ME THEY'RE
NOT THINKING THOSE THINGS AND
THAT'S HOW THE REAL WORLD IS.
>> Reporter: WITH A WIFE AND TWO
ADOPTED DAUGHTERS TO SUPPORT,
GROTTOLA COULDN'T JUST HANG IT
UP.
SO HE DECIDED TO GO IT ALONE,
FOUNDING M.G.G. CONSULTING TO
ADVISE OTHER SMALL BUSINESSES.
>> HANGING UP A SHINGLE AND
ROLLING YOUR OWN BUSINESS AND
OPENING UP THE BANK ACCOUNTS,
AND GETTING THE COMPANY NAME,
AND PROMOTING, AND ALL THAT
STUFF IS NOT FOR EVERYBODY.
BUT, IF IT'S FOR YOU, IT'S A LOT
OF FUN.
I HAD NO JOB, NO MONEY, NOS, NOY
I HAVE 40 CLIENTS.
I'VE HIRED SOMEONE FULL-TIME.
I'VE GROWN, BUT IT'S BEEN HARD
WORK.
>> Reporter: HOW OLD IS TOO OLD?
>> I THINK I CAN DO THIS UNTIL
80 OR 90, ALRIGHT, AND THE
REALITY IS I DON'T THINK YOU CAN
THINK IN TERMS OF TOO OLD.
IT'S HOW YOU FEEL, IT'S HOW MUCH
FIRE YOU HAVE, AND IF YOU'RE
SMART AND YOU REALIZE YOU'RE
GETTING OLDER, WELL THEN GET
INTO A BUSINESS WHERE YOU
LEVERAGE THE YOUNGER PEOPLE AND
EVENTUALLY YOU BECOME THE GREAT
GRAY GOD.
>> Reporter: MARC FREEDMAN RUNS
A NON-PROFIT CALLED encore.org.
HE HAS LONG SEEN
ENTREPRENEURSHIP AS AN ANSWER TO
THE CHALLENGES POSED BY THE MASS
OF RIPENING BOOMERS APPROACHING
TRADITIONAL RETIREMENT AGE.
>> AS A SOCIETY WE NEED TO TAKE
THE FULL PRODUCTIVE POTENTIAL OF
THIS POPULATION AND USE IT IN
WAYS THAT WILL HELP EVERYBODY
BENEFIT.
ESPECIALLY AS THE DEMOGRAPHICS
CHANGE, YOU CANT JUST HAVE 30 OR
40 YEAR RETIREMENTS AND SO THESE
ENTREPRENEURS AND THE OTHERS WHO
ARE WORKING LONGER ARE
FASHIONING A NEW STAGE OF LIFE
THAT'S MUCH MORE SUSTAINABLE.
>> Reporter: BUT OTHERS DOUBT
THAT OLDER ENTREPRENEURSHIP IS
THE ANSWER.
>> I FIND THAT PEOPLE
FUNDAMENTALLY STOP TRYING NEW
THINGS AFTER THE AGE OF 30.
>> Reporter: SILICON VENTURE
CAPITALIST VINOD KHOSLA:
>> AFTER 45, PEOPLE BASICALLY
DIE.
(LAUGHTER)
>> Reporter: KHOSLA WAS BEING
PROVOCATIVE, SAYS HE INVESTS IN
SEVERAL FIRMS RUN BY FOLKS OVER
45.
BUT FREEDMAN SAYS HE'S VOICING
THE CONVENTIONAL WISDOM: THAT,
AFTER A CERTAIN AGE, FOLKS ARE
THOUGHT TO BE WELL PAST THEIR
USEFUL PRIME.
>> IT TURNS OUT THAT CREATIVITY
HAS A LIFE THAT'S VERY DIFFERENT
FROM THE POPULAR ASSUMPTION.
CEZANNE'S MOST VALUABLE WORK IS
DONE IN HIS LATE 60S.
LOUISE BOURGEOIS, THE GREAT
SCULPTOR, DOES HER MOST VALUABLE
WORK IN HER 80S AND ECONOMISTS
HAVE SHOWN OVER AND OVER AGAIN
THAT THERE IS THIS LATE BLOOMING
BURST OF CREATIVITY THAT I THINK
IS SHOWING UP NOT JUST IN THE
ARTS, BUT ALSO IN
ENTREPRENEURSHIP, IN SOCIAL
INNOVATION AND I THINK IT RAISES
THE QUESTION THAT AN OLDER
SOCIETY DOESN'T NECESSARILY HAVE
TO BE A LESS INNOVATIVE ONE.
>> Reporter: IN FACT, ONE MUCH-
CITED STUDY SHOWED THE AVERAGE
AGE AT WHICH PEOPLE PRODUCE
GREAT INNOVATIONS HAS RISEN
SUBSTANTIALLY OVER THE LAST
CENTURY.
encore.org WAS FOUNDED TO
ENCOURAGE INNOVATION AWARDING
THE ANNUAL PURPOSE PRIZE TO
SENIORS DOING SOCIAL GOOD.
>> THEY DON'T SET OUT WITH A
GRAND NOTION AND IDENTITY AS
ENTREPRENEUR.
THEY SET OUT A STEP AT A TIME TO
SOLVE A PROBLEM THAT'S IN FRONT
OF THEM AND IN MANY WAYS LEADS
TO VERY CREATIVE NEW VENTURES.
>> Reporter: MIKE GROTTOLA'S
CLIENT PAUL JETTER, FOR EXAMPLE.
HIS BUSINESS WAS INSPIRED BY
COMPASSION FOR HIS FATHER.
>> ONE DAY HE WAS DRIVING TO
WORK AND HE BECAME DISORIENTED,
AND EVEN THOUGH HE'S WORKED
EVERY DAY THAT I HAVE KNOWN HIM
HE DECIDED THAT HE COULD NOT GO
IN.
>> Reporter: AT 85 HE HAD
ALZHEIMER'S.
A COMMON SYMPTOM OF THE DISEASE:
WANDERING.
>> I LOOKED INTO WHAT WERE THE
PROGRAMS OUT THERE FOR WANDERING
AND NEARLY ALL OF THEM REQUIRED
THAT YOU WEAR A BRACELET WHETHER
IT'S TRACKING OR AN I.D.
AND I KNEW HE WOULD NOT WEAR A
BRACELET.
>> Reporter: SO, WITH A LITTLE
HELP FROM GROTTOLA, JETTER IS
SETTING UP SAFELY BACK HOME,
TO MAKE GARMENTS TO HELP
IDENTIFY AND FIND QUICK CARE FOR
LOST LOVED ONES.
A SECOND CAREER AT AGE 59.
>> NOT YOUR TYPICAL KIND OF
MANNEQUIN, OF COURSE.
MORE LIKE A PAPER DOLL.
>> Reporter: THANKS TO JUDI
HENDERSON-TOWNSEND'S RENTAL
BUSINESS, SENESCENT FASHION
MODELS ARE GETTING A SECOND LIFE
TOO.
>> I'VE GIVEN THEM AN
OPPORTUNITY TO HAVE AN ENCORE
CAREER.
WE'RE SEEING THAT WITH SENIORS,
RIGHT?
THEY STILL HAVE A LOT OF GREAT
THINGS THAT THEY CAN CONTRIBUTE
BUT THEY'RE OLD.
>> Reporter: OLD, SURE, BUT WITH
VISION AND A BODY OF WORK TO
DRAW ON, NOT TOO OLD TO START
SOMETHING STARTLINGLY NEW.
>> Ifill: ONLINE, JUDI
HENDERSON-TOWNSEND DESCRIBES THE
UNUSUAL REASONS CUSTOMERS NEED
MANNEQUINS.
YOU CAN ALSO FIND TIPS FOR
SENIOR ENTREPRENEURS.
THAT'S ON OUR MAKING SENSE PAGE.
>> Brown: FINALLY, THE MURDER
TRIAL OF AN ABORTION PROVIDER
THAT HAS CAPTURED NATIONAL
ATTENTION.
JUDY WOODRUFF HAS THE STORY.
>> Woodruff: A JUDGE AND JURY IN
PHILADELPHIA BEGAN HEARING
TESTIMONY IN THE CASE OF DOCTOR
KERMIT GOSNELL MORE THAN A MONTH
AGO.
BUT OVER THE PAST TWO WEEKS, THE
TRIAL HAS RECEIVED MORE COVERAGE
FROM NATIONAL NEWS ORGANIZATIONS
AFTER BOTH SIDES OF THE ABORTION
DEBATE BEGAN FIGHTING OVER ITS
SIGNIFICANCE.
GOSNELL IS BEING TRIED ON EIGHT
COUNTS OF MURDER-- SEVEN OF THEM
FOR ALLEGEDLY KILLING BABIES
THAT PROSECUTORS SAY WERE BORN
ALIVE AND VIABLE.
THE EIGHTH COUNT IS FOR HIS ROLE
IN THE DEATH OF AN IMMIGRANT
FROM BHUTAN.
ATTORNEYS SAY SHE DIED OF AN
OVERDOSE FROM A SEDATIVE SHE WAS
GIVEN.
THE CASE STEMS FROM AN F.B.I.
RAID ON HIS PHILADELPHIA CLINIC
IN 2010.
INVESTIGATORS FOUND HORRIFIC
CONDITIONS AND SAY HE PERFORMED
SOME ABORTIONS AFTER THE 24-WEEK
LEGAL LIMIT IN PENNSYLVANIA.
GOSNELL'S DEFENSE IS SCHEDULED
TO BEGIN THIS WEEK AND OBSERVERS
ARE WAITING TO SEE IF HE WILL
TESTIFY.
REPORTER MARY CLAIRE DALE OF THE
ASSOCIATED PRESS HAS COVERED THE
TRIAL SINCE IT BEGAN.
SHE JOINS US TONIGHT FROM
PHILADELPHIA.
WELCOME TO THE PROGRAM.
MARY CLAIRE DALE, FIRST OF ALL,
TELL US WHAT ARE THE CHARGES
AGAINST DR. GOSNELL.
>> GOOD EVENING.
THE CHARGES INCLUDE EIGHT COUNTS
OF MURDER, SEVEN OF THEM ARE
FIRST-DEGREE MURDER AND COULD
BRING THE DEATH PENALTY.
THOSE ARE THE CHARGES INVOLVING
THE BABIES WHO WERE ALLEGEDLY
BORN ALIVE.
THE 8th MURDER COUNT IS A
THIRD-DEGREE MURDER COUNT
INVOLVING THE OVERDOSED DEATH OF
THE 41-YEAR-OLD PATIENT.
>> Woodruff: AND THIS ALL
STEMMED AS WE SAID FROM
INVESTIGATORS COMING INTO THE
CLINIC A FEW YEARS AGO.
THEY WERE ACTUALLY LOOKING FOR
SOMETHING ELSE.
>> YES, INDEED.
THEY WERE RESPONDING, WE THINK,
TO A TIP ABOUT DRUG, PRESCRIBING
OF PRESCRIPTION DRUGS INCLUDING
OXYCONTIN.
HE WAS APPARENTLY ONE OF THE
MORE HIGH-VOLUME PRESCRIBERS IN
THE STATE OF PENNSYLVANIA.
THE RAID WAS INTENDED TO EXAMINE
THAT.
ALLEGEDLY WAS FREELY WRITING
PRESCRIPTIONS FOR ADDICTS AND
DRUG DEALERS, ET CETERA.
BUT WHAT THE F.B.I. AND OTHER
FEDERAL AND STATE AUTHORITIES
STUMBLED UPON WHEN THEY WERE
THERE WAS THAT ABORTIONS WERE
GOING ON THAT EVENING.
THEY WERE EXPECTING TO ARRIVE AT
THE CLINIC IN THE EVENING AND
FIND THAT THEY WERE HOPING THAT
THEY WOULD NOT ENCOUNTER THE
ABORTION GOING ON.
THEY DIDN'T WANT TO INTERRUPT
THAT.
BUT, IN FACT, GOSNELL TENDED TO
PERFORM THE SURGERIES THAT NIGHT
AFTER THE PATIENTS HAD BEEN
THERE DURING THE DAY.
THEY FOUND, THEY SAID, VERY
UNSANITARY, FILTHY CONDITIONS.
SOMEWHAT MACABRE FINDINGS
INCLUDING FETUSES THAT WERE
STORED IN THE FREEZER.
DURING THE TRIAL WE LEARNED THAT
THAT WAS PERHAPS BECAUSE IN A
BILLING DISPUTE WITH HIS MEDICAL
DISPOSAL COMPANY AND HAD NOWHERE
TO... THEY WERE NOT BEING PICKED
UP.
SO THAT ACTUALLY PROVIDED
EVIDENCE FOR PROSECUTORS.
THEY COULD PERFORM AUTOPSIES
AND, YOU KNOW, LEARN WHETHER OR
NOT THEY BELIEVED THE BABIES
WERE LATE-TERM.
YOU KNOW, CONDUCT OTHER
INVESTIGATION ON THE FINDINGS IN
THE CLINIC.
>> Woodruff: IN FACT, MUCH OF
THE TESTIMONY HAS BEEN PRETTY
GRAPHIC.
WHAT KINDS OF THINGS HAVE YOU
BEEN HEARING, INCLUDING FROM HIS
FORMER EMPLOYEES?
>> RIGHT.
MUCH OF THE PROSECUTION
TESTIMONY DOES COME FROM FORMER
EMPLOYEES.
EIGHT OF WHOM HAVE PLEADED
GUIY INLT THE CASE.
THREE OF THEM INDEED PLEADED
GUILTY TO THIRD DEGREE MURDER
AND AWAIT SENTENCING.
OF COURSE, THEY WILL GET CREDIT
FOR THEIR COOPERATION.
THEY'VE TESTIFIED TO A NUMBER OF
THINGS, INCLUDING ABOUT
THEMSELVES THAT THEY WERE OFTEN
UNLICENSED OR UNTRAINED.
SOME OF THE WOMEN WHO WERE DOING
I.V. DRUG ADMINISTRATION AS WELL
ALWAYS ULTRASOUNDS AND INDEED
ASSISTING WITH ABORTIONS HAD
MERELY A FEW MONTHS OF TRAINING
FROM A MEDICAL... TO BE MEDICAL
ASSISTANTS.
ANOTHER YOUNG WOMAN WAS A
15-YEAR-OLD TEENAGER WHEN SHE
BEGAN WORKING THERE.
THROUGH SOME SORT OF A SCHOOL
EXTERNSHIP PROGRAM.
SHE TOO CAME TO WORK IN THE
PROCEDURE ROOM.
AND THEN THERE WERE TWO
UNLICENSED DOCTORS WHO WERE
WORKING THERE.
ONE WHO DEALT MAINLY WITH
NON-ABORTION PATIENTS.
OFTEN GERIATRIC PATIENTS WHO
WERE THERE JUST FOR BASIC
MEDICAL CARE.
BUT ANOTHER STEVEN MASSOF WHO
HAS TESTIFIED THAT HE HIMSELF
PERFORMED MANY OF THESE
ABORTIONS AND HE ADMITS THAT HE
KILLED BABIES AFTER THEY WERE
BORN ALIVE.
>> Woodruff: SOME OF THE
TESTIMONY HAS BEEN ABOUT THAT,
ABOUT BABIES BEING BORN ALIVE
AND THEN BEING PUT TO DEATH
THERE IN THE DELIVERY ROOM.
>> RIGHT.
THAT IS TRUE.
SO THE JURY HAS HEARD QUITE
GRAPHIC TESTIMONY IN ADDITION TO
SOME PHOTOGRAPHS THAT EMPLOYEES
TOOK, SOME CELL PHONE
PHOTOGRAPHS AND OTHER
PHOTOGRAPHS.
OF COURSE WE HAVE THE
INVESTIGATIVE PHOTOGRAPHS OF THE
CLINIC AND SOME OF THE FETUSES
THAT WERE FOUND THAT NIGHT.
THE TESTIMONY IS QUITE JARRING,
BUT THERE WAS ABOUT TWO WEEKS OF
JURY SELECTION.
AND THE JUDGE DID MAKE SURE THAT
HE FOUND JURORS WHO THOUGHT THAT
THEY COULD TOLERATE THAT.
AND STILL JUDGE THE CASE FAIRLY.
>> Woodruff: WHAT ARE YOU
EXPECTING?
I KNOW THE DEFENSE IS SUPPOSED
TO BE GETTING UNDERWAY.
WHAT ARE THEY EXPECTED TO SAY?
>> WELL, MUCH OF THE DEFENSE HAS
REALLY ALREADY BEEN TAKING PLACE
ON CROSS-EXAMINATION AS IS OFTEN
THE CASE IN TRIALS.
THE DEFENSE LAWYER FOR
DR. GOSNELL, JACK McMAHON, HAS
ARGUED THROUGH HIS QUESTIONING
AND THROUGH HIS OPENING
STATEMENTS THAT THERE WERE NO
LIVE BIRTHS AT THE CLINIC IN HIS
VIEW OF THE CASE.
HE SAYS THAT STAFF MEMBERS WHO
SAW BABIES OR THOUGHT THEY SAW
BABIES MOVE WERE MERELY
WITNESSING SOME INVOLUNTARY
RESPONSES AMID THE DEATH
PROCESS.
SO THAT IS HIS ARGUMENT TO THE
STAFF TESTIMONY.
ALSO IN OPENING STATEMENTS
PROSECUTORS HAD SAID THAT THEY
WOULD BE ABLE TO PROVE AT TRIAL
THAT FROM THE FETAL REMAINS THAT
TWO BABIES TOOK A BREAST BASED
ON THE AUTOPSIES BUT WHEN THE
MEDICAL EXAMINER FOR THE CITY OF
PHILADELPHIA CAME ON, HE STOPPED
SHORT OF BEING ABLE TO CONFIRM
THAT.
HE SAYS THAT HE ACTUALLY COULD
NOT CONFIRM THAT BECAUSE OF THE
DETERIORATION OF THE CELLS ONCE
THEY WERE ABLE TO DO THE
AUTOPSIES ON SOME OF THESE
ABORTED FETUSES.
SO THE DEFENSE IS, YOU KNOW,
PLANS TO ALSO BRING CHARACTER
WITNESSES.
WE ARE NOT YET SURE WHETHER
DR. GOSNELL WILL TESTIFY.
HE DID DO AN INTERVIEW WHILE HE
WAS UNDER INVESTIGATION.
HE DID A MEDIA INTERVIEW.
HE SEEMS NOT SHY ABOUT TALKING.
SO WE'LL SEE.
WE EXPECT THAT HE MIGHT WELL
COME ON.
>> Woodruff: MARY CLAIRE DALE,
ONE FINAL QUESTION.
WE MENTIONED THE DISPUTE ABOUT
THE MEDIA'S FOCUSEDTTE ANTION.
HOW MUCH MEDIA ATTENTION HAS
THERE BEEN ON THIS TRIAL?
>> THERE WAS QUITE A BIT WHEN
THE GRAND JURY REPORT CAME OUT
IN 2011.
THAT WAS ALMOST A 300-PAGE
REPORT.
THERE WAS BOTH LOCAL AND
NATIONAL MEDIA.
AND THERE HAS BEEN COVERAGE
THROUGHOUT THE TRIAL.
THERE WAS MORE ONCE THERE WAS
SOME BACK-AND-FORTH ABOUT
WHETHER ENOUGH MEDIA OUTLETS
WERE COVERING IT.
THE ONE THING IS CAMERAS ARE NOT
ALLOWED IN COURTROOMS IN THE
STATE OF PENNSYLVANIA.
THERE'S A GAG ORDER IN THIS
TRIAL WHICH PREVENTS LAWYERS
FROM SPEAKING OUTSIDE THE
COURTROOM SO IT IS A BIT TOUGH
FOR BROADCASTERS TO, YOU KNOW,
GET THE KIND OF FOOTAGE THAT
THEY TYPICALLY MIGHT WISH TO
GET.
THERE ARE MORE PEOPLE HERE NOW
COVERING THE TRIAL.
SO WE'LL SEE FROM HERE ON OUT.
>> MARY CLAIRE DALE COVERING THE
TRIAL OF DR. KERMIT GOSNELL IN
PHILADELPHIA.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Brown: AGAIN, THE MAJOR
DEVELOPMENTS OF THE DAY:
THE SURVIVING SUSPECT IN THE
BOSTON BOMBINGS WAS CHARGED WITH
THE USE OF A WEAPON OF MASS
DESTRUCTION-- A FEDERAL CRIME
THAT COULD CARRY THE DEATH
PENALTY.
POLICE IN CANADA ANNOUNCED
THEY'VE BROKEN UP A PLOT TO
DERAIL A PASSENGER TRAIN.
THEY SAID THEY ARRESTED TWO MEN
WHO HAD GUIDANCE AND DIRECTION
FROM AL-QAEDA.
AND, FLIGHT DELAYS SPREAD ACROSS
THE U.S. AS THOUSANDS OF AIR
TRAFFIC CONTROLLERS WERE
FURLOUGHED FOR A DAY.
THE F.A.A. BLAMED FEDERAL BUDGET
CUTS.
>> Ifill: ONLINE, WE TAKE YOU
INSIDE ONE OF THE WORLD'S
GREENEST BUILDINGS.
KWAME HOLMAN HAS THE STORY.
>> Holman: IN HONOR OF EARTH
DAY, WE LOOK AT  SEATTLE'S NEW
BULLITT CENTER-- THE BUILDING
BOASTS THE WORLD'S FIRST SIX-
STORY COMPOSTING TOILET SYSTEM.T
FROM OUR PARTNERS AT KCTS 9 AND
EARTHFIX ON OUR HOMEPAGE.
AND AUTHOR ERICA BROWN SAYS, IN
PREPARING FOR DEATH, SHOULDN'T
YOUR SURVIVORS INHERIT MORE THAN
JUST YOUR FINANCES?
SHE ADVISES CREATING AN ETHICAL
WILL TO PASS ALONG WISDOM AND
LIFE LESSONS TO YOUNGER
GENERATIONS.
FIND THAT STORY ON OUR HEALTH
PAGE.
ALL THAT AND MORE IS ON OUR
WEBSITE newshour.pbs.org.
GWEN?
>> Ifill: AND THAT'S THE
"NEWSHOUR" FOR TONIGHT.
ON TUESDAY, WE'LL EXAMINE HOW
CUTS TO FEDERAL SPENDING ARE
SLOWING DOWN THE AIRLINE
INDUSTRY.
I'M GWEN IFILL.
>> Brown: AND I'M JEFFREY BROWN.
WE'LL SEE YOU ONLINE AND AGAIN
HERE TOMORROW EVENING.
THANK YOU FOR JOINING US.
GOOD NIGHT.